If you want to classify, you're either going to be
involved in the production of a radioactive
substance, if that's your interest, or you're
going to be involved in looking at the radiation
that comes off the reactor itself, those parts.
The radiation that comes after the reactor itself
went down in popularity? Only because of the
completion of studies of particle physics.
That was in the early 70s? Yeah, the effort was so
intense, as I said, throughout the world, that
they progressed very rapidly.
The intensity definitely fell away. Once the
information is gathered, the basic information,
it has not changed much. Well, you still have
people looking, and they'll change numbers a
little bit. You'll see a little change, but not
much of a change. Has the popularity of creating
radioactive material or creating advanced codes
or activating material, has that changed since
you started? Well, it's changed in the fact that I
think there's more ingenuity in the use of these
materials, particularly the medical field.
They're just really on the threshold of nuclear
medicine. It's going to become even more
sophisticated, more and more uses of these
materials. We're going to see them coming up
regularly now. Japanese, for example, are doing
quite well in brain cancer treatment with capture
boron, boron capture work. Whereas in the United
States, we're not that far along. There's an
interest now. It's starting.
Do you think now is the critical time period in
medical? I wouldn't say it's critical. I don't say
it's critical. I think nuclear medicine is doing
quite well. The advances are very, very good. But I
think you may be on a threshold of really breaking
through and doing a lot of things. You could be
plugging away for a while and now is the time it's
going to break open. And also, there's more
interest among the medical people. When do you
think that interest began in terms of what you were
doing? years ago. Nuclear medicine is not, the
whole field is not that new. We've had experts in
nuclear medicine for many years, but a lot of it has
to do with the development of good electronics.
Really advanced quite rapidly. Computer-based
analyses, things that were just too difficult to
do by hand in the early days. Too many numbers to
handle, too too many things to look at now it's done
so easily with a computer so you can feed back
information in a diagnostic case feed it into a
computer and it will digest all that information
and give you a very simple answer I think the
electronics has played just as vital part as any
because the reactors have always been here. The
radioactive materials have always been
available. It's just that the technology to use
them is what's really advancing. Now, didn't the
research going on at the Nuclear Science Center,
wasn't it closely coordinated with the Data
Processing Center in trying to use the computer
for analysis when it first opened? several of our
users that become heavily involved with the
computing center. The Activation Analysis Lab,
the AARL, and now the CTC. They use this facility
mainly for activating their samples, and then
they count them here, put that on tape, take that
information into campus, and put it on the large
computers. where they can handle more data, more
information, very quickly and in a more
sophisticated manner than you could if you're in
the laboratory trying to handle it on a much
smaller instrument that doesn't have the
capability. Yes, definitely our users get
involved with the data processors. We get
involved with it when we do studies on our reactor
for the operations of the reactor. But the air
reactor, you know, as far as use of it for isotope
reduction and radiation work, the other nice use
of this reactor is training and teaching. You
know, there's the operations side of it, how the
reactors operate,
training of operators for nuclear power plants,
the handling of of radioactive materials within
the facility, the hands-on experience of a health
physicist, the radiation policeman, as we call
him, or them. They can come to this facility, and we
can let them handle radioactive materials,
something they cannot get in the classroom. How
has the center been used in education today? Oh,
quite extensively. Has it changed at all? I'd say
it has. I'd say in the last 10 years there's
considerable more interest
by more departments on the campus. It's nothing
more than just an introduction. They want to
introduce the student to the reactor and what it
could do. If it's nothing more than just a tour
where a professor wants to bring his class out,
we're seeing more and more of that. Because
I guess some of these professors were realizing
that students were going through A&M and didn't
even know there was a reactor here. Exposure is
mainly to the experimenter and not directly to the
student. So we, for example, the chemistry,
freshman chemistry, in one week alone, we run
through something like 600 to 700 students. Just a
tool. That happens twice a year, and the physics
department does the same thing. These are our
future researchers. If they know such a tool
exists at that earliest age in their education,
it's a good chance to keep that in the back of their
mind and know that it's a good tool for the future in
their studies. And then we have the other
educational application where you you're
involved in graduate research, the master's
research, or the doctorate research. In that
case, we offer our facilities and our expertise.
And we will train the individuals in the operation
of our equipment. And when they become capable of
operating that equipment on their own, we turn
them loose and they do their own research. But we
are involved in the training of that individual. A
lot of our graduate students would say come from
life science. Let's take, for example, someone
who's going to study the uptake of arsenic in
catfish in the rivers. He's going to do it by a
nuclear method. He's never been around a reactor.
He doesn't know anything about it. So we have to
take that individual and work with him and train
him on not only how to The instrumentation are the
counting systems to analyze his samples, but to
give him some idea of what's going on with the
reactor, why his samples are radioactive, and so
forth and so on, can help him out. Most of our
experimenters, though, have some background in
working with radiation. We do not handle a large
number that have just a basic idea and need to be
taken from the very beginning of it, stepwise,
right on through. Now, they've changed the
hierarchy of who you report to. Is that just last
year? That has changed. Okay. Well, for many
years, the first change that I recall at the
Science Center was the changing between Dr.
Cochran and Dr. Randall. Dr. Cochran just
reverted back to being head of nuclear
engineering. They assigned a separate person to
be director of the center. It was that way until
just recently, as far as reporting up.
To report entities, we've always usually had some
administrator there to report to. Harry Whitmore
has been the overseer of this facility for many
years. He probably can give you a very detailed
history of the administration of the Science
Center. But when Dr. Porter became director, Dr.
Randall reported to Harry Whitmore again for
about two years. when Dr. Erdman arrived, took the
place of Dr. Cochran as the head of the department.
Tease placed Dr. Erdman in the line of
administration. I now report, well, it was Dr.
Randall first when he was still here. Dr. Randall
would report to Dr. Erdman, would turn, would then
go to Whitmore and then the chain of command went up
that way to Porter. If you look at the black box in T,
so to speak, the administrative block, Dr. Ervin
is there now as the head of nuclear engineering
research. Because the department heads of
engineering are assigned a portion of their time
into T's for research. And they are the directors
of of research for their particular field of
engineering. So in this case, they just placed Dr.
Erdman there as the administrator we go for. Has
that made any difference in your operations at
all? Well, I think it has. I think better
communications, I think, compared to the last two
years. Communications with the faculty?
Entities. Entities. And the faculty,
yes.
better progress in keeping in touch with the
faculty in nuclear engineering. There seemed to
be a period there where we were not in contact that
close.
Now, the Nuclear Science Center has embarked upon
a new direction within the last, actually the last
two years we did this. We're now on a very large
campaign to sell this facility to the university.
We feel that We're not that well exposed. More
people need to know about us. If the department
heads know more about this facility, then the next
time they look at a faculty member to come on staff
on board, they may look at that faculty prospect as
being a potential user of the facility.
Chemistry, there seems to be quite a bit of
interest It's been being built up over there. We
have several people that are interested in using
the reactor. It's taken several years to reach
that point. We need more involvement by
engineering. Materials testing. We do not have a
lot of interest. Did you ever have any interest?
Yes, there's been material testing interest. But
I mean, it's been rather... Is it small but steady?
It seems to always depend upon who is at the
university. If this person has that interest and
he's at the university, then he's going to come to
the center and use it. It's very difficult to speak
with a researcher who has a special interest and
convince him he needs to change his interest. That
just doesn't work. The way to do it is to hire him to
do it. bring the type of researcher to the
university that would use the facility. And
that's our goal, is to work with the
administrators. Hopefully, that they would
bring these type of people to Indiana. For
example, right now, Dr. Dan Hightower over at the
vet school would love to see a good radio
pharmaceutical expert here for the the preparing
of pharmaceuticals
in medical research. But they're basically the
preparation of radioactive pharmaceuticals.
And they have to be clinically certified and so
forth. So it's not an easy thing. And there are a lot
of areas that could be researched in medical
pharmaceuticals. So that's just one example. Was
this something that the Nuclear Science Center
decided would be happening, or was this something
that came down to you? No, this is TEAS. TEAS has
asked for studies, I'd say extensive studies of
this facility started about four years ago
by TEAS. Now, TEAS, of course, you've got to
realize they are a division that's established by
the legislature to provide a research link the
industry serving the industrial requirements of
the state of Texas. That's done by working with the
faculty, sharing the faculty with engineering,
yeah, with the college of engineering to produce
these basic research needs to improve anything
within first the state and then the region. And the
Science Center is really doing more than just that
type of work, that sponsored research more to some
extent. Because we're also involved in teaching
and we're also involved in education. And we're a
multi-use type facility rather than just
sponsored research only. So I can understand why
TEAS is looking at us in terms of maybe making more
money for them than paying their way and stuff like
that. That seems to be the real problem within, our
problem within TV journalism. But research
reactors do not make money. They do not pay their
own money. None of them do. No, they don't. They're
not that way. They're operated by the university
systems as teaching, training, and research
tools, and they're They're just an educational
expense and research expense that's realized.
That's the framework of most of the reactors.
Well, most. Certainly the majority. Is it a
similar problem to what the data processing
centers have in terms of they will ? I think so, but
again, it's a... But they're an educational
expense and a training expense. Right. You're
probably, in your work in interviewing people
with NTs, you will find that their philosophy is
that they are more than willing to develop
research capabilities. But once those research
capabilities are developed, good, sound
research projects, as far as they're concerned,
have enough sponsorship behind that research to
pay for the facility's operation. And that's
where this facility has a problem. because it
takes specially trained people to operate a
reactor. So we're a little heavy on the
administrative and engineer side because
there's quite a bit of responsibility. We're
involved in safety. We have to do everything by
strict requirements, the regulations that are
established by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. We must comply with those, and that
takes a lot of our time. We must be aware of any new
regulations to our administrators. We spend time
commenting, attending meetings, discussing
things with the NRC. They're a regulatory agency,
and you must have an input. If you do not speak up,
you're going to be regulated to the point where you
can't do anything. So you have to defend yourself,
is what I'm saying. And to defend yourself takes a
lot of time. It sure does. Now, back on the
education side, you must realize too that we do
have the laboratory instruction. Nuclear
engineering labs are conducted here. These are
usually the type of laboratory where each week the
student will perform an experiment. It can be done
within a four hour period. either a study of the
behavior of the reactor, or he may be dealing with
just other things I've been speaking of, an
isotope production experiment, or maybe even a
beam extraction experiment. Has this always been
the case in terms of being used as a lab? Yes, it
varies in intensity, again, depending on
faculty. There are some faculty that would be very
interested in doing the experiments here. And
then if that course is assigned to a different
professor, there's a good chance that he has other
ideas or other plans for the course. And he
wouldn't use the reactor as much as the previous
professor. How do you do nuclear experiments
without a reactor? You don't. Oh, yeah, there are
laboratories. purchase sources and do... If
you're having your students do labs... Okay,
they're just doing something different. They're
not getting this knowledge. That's true. They'd
have to be learning something different. True.
But they can deal with radioactivity in a
laboratory by purchasing sources.
But... If you're going to study the behavior of a
reactor, then you obviously must have a reactor.
That's the one thing. Of course, I feel very
strongly that you're going to have a much
better educated engineer coming out of this
system in nuclear engineering if he's been
associated with a reactor. Some knowledge of it.
how it operates, what you can do with him, and the
do's and don'ts in terms of his safety, his
personnel safety. Because he may be stepping
right into a facility, and if he's had no
experience or actual training of working with
radioactivity, he may be a weak engineer for a
while. He may be a little careless about what he's
doing. He may not appreciate the effects of
radiation on his body. He may do things that aren't
too careful. Or he may be so scared of it, either
way, it could go either way you want to. So afraid of
it, he doesn't want to do his work. Because we try to
show the student that if you follow procedures,
and you have a basic knowledge of radiation, you
can work with it very safely if you're
level-headed and just follow rules. That's
exactly the way we operate out here. We do
everything by following rules. We operate a
reactor that way. We conduct our experiments that
way. We have auditing and monitoring of just about
everything we do. You're talking about... the
highest regulated field of research or industry
there is. No one's ever died in a nuclear power
plant from radiation. They've fallen off ladders
and broken arms and legs and things like that, but
the only accidents we've had in the nuclear field
have been in the laboratories or in experimental
reactors.
Our military is heavily involved in reactors, in
submarines and surface ships. We've had reactors
that have gone to the Arctic and they're dropped in
sections from airplanes and they're put together
on the ice. All types of development of reactors.
The early scientists that were developing
weapons, they've had some accidents. But the
industry, the nuclear power industry, has not
experienced that kind of an accident, no doubt.
Has this particular facility had any problems
with ? No. We're very fortunate. We have a very
understanding community.
People in this community, the state of Texas even,
if you want to include the whole state, are highly
supportive of research. They just don't have
that. There's a small group called the Armadillo
Force that have shown some demonstrations at the
nuclear power plants. But that's only because of a
pickup from what they, you get these ideas from the
newspapers and the press. But you've not had any
demonstrations here throughout your history?
No. No? We just went through our re-licensing of
this facility, which continues our license for
another 20 years. And in that re-licensing
process, our license and our application appears
in the public document room in Washington. And
there were no interveners, no questions asked at
all on the material we submitted and what we were
going to do with the reactor. State of California,
that's a completely different picture. The UCLA
reactor,
they're trying to re-license and they have
interveners. It's really a mess. It's all tied up
in legal matters now. They're going to shut that
reactor down during the Olympics for fear of a
terrorist target. The only reason it's a target is
because it's been in the news. If you broadcast
these things and point them out, then you're going
to have problems. But as long as you have a very
calm, understanding community, then you're
okay.
We've had several articles through the years
telling our general public that we're not an
environmental force or impact at all in this
community. And we monitor that very carefully. We
have to put extensive reports into the NRC, into
the state of Texas concerning the environment
that we may have a part of, an effect upon. We
monitor the creeks for any radioactivity, the
grass, the dirt samples around for several miles.
Monitor the milk at the dairy up here for any traces
of radioactivity that could to be associated
either with this facility or any other. If you
compare that to this power plant over here,
Gibbons Creek, that's going to be burning
lignite, they're going to be puffing all kinds of
radioactivity up that stack of natural
radioactivity that's been dug out of the earth,
but it's going to be discharged in such a way that it
comes out of their concentration because there's
uranium in that dirt, in that coal. And that
uranium is going to go up that stack. So they're
going to have far more environmental impact than
we would at this facility. Because the byproduct
we have that goes up our stack around research
reactors, it's a gas. It's contained in air. It's
argon that's in air. And we produce a radioactive
material any time air gets around the reactor.
because there's argon in there. But the argon has a
very short half-life. It doesn't stay around very
long. In fact, in a matter of something like five
hours, it's roughly 90% gone. And we discharge it
at a high altitude. It disperses at a very, very low
level. In fact, it's so low once it leaves our
facility that we can't even detect it. We must
detect it inside the facility when it's
concentrated for us to even know that we're
releasing it. It's that low. There's not a threat
at all. Have you noticed any change in use of
facilities or attitudes towards the facilities
with administrative changes in the university?
We didn't see many changes.
Basically until, I'd say, the changing between
Benson and Porter.
I think that was the most drastic change in looking
at our operation. I think it's typical of that
administration. They looked, as you said, they
looked at the data processing center. I'm sure
they're looking at places like the wind tunnel.
In fact, right now, we're under a review. There are
several considerations that Tiege looks at. The
refueling of a reactor that's been in the
newspapers. You might have seen the article
related to that. The concerns of the commission
are that we may become targets of terrorists.
Well, this would bother any administration.
If I were Dr. Porter, I'd be concerned because he's
licensee. So it's up to me to keep him properly
informed. Because a lot of things you read in the
newspapers sometimes are scary tactics. If you
know a little bit more about it, you can sit down and
think it through and be reasonable about it. You
have a better control. There has been action by one
of the commissioners to try to more or less scare
our administrators into shutting down our
reactors. He puts out this information that we
have nuclear, we have bomb material in our
facilities. It's not true.
The terrorists cannot take what we have without a
considerable degree of difficulty. He would have
to to really work at it, to come up with a weapon. I
mean, he would have to almost be a major power to do
it. A small nation couldn't do it. It's just too
sophisticated, too complicated. It's not the
right material. That's the first thing. And
that's what I tried to point out in my
conversations to the public around why we're not a
terrorist target. are a theft target of this
field. Research reactors are. As a service
facility, what does TEAS do for you? What does it do
for us? Well, first of all, it's the parent funding
we have. That's the main thing. But TEAS has an
interest in serving the university and serving
industry in Texas. Through that philosophy, we
have a facility that can do that. And that's why
we've always been a part of TEAS. We have the type of
research facility that's suited for sponsored
research, government research, industrial. And
if you bring those kind of dollars into the system
through TEAS, that allows you to place the faculty
member in that budget, some graduate students,
purchase of equipment, things of that nature. So
if you look at T's side of it, that's what they want
to do. The
research reactors, in our case, we spend a lot of
our time on teaching and training. We just do not
have that many sponsored research programs. The
only way to get them, as I said before, is to have the
faculty members here that can generate that type
of interest. And it's improving. There's some
researchers now in the Department of Engineering
that have some very good proposals. I can remember
that sometimes there were no There wasn't a single
proposal from engineering. Well, back in, I'd
say, mid-'70s or early-'70s,
we were doing most of our work for other
disciplines. College of Science, we were doing a
lot of geological work, chemistry,
biochemistry, life sciences, veterinary
medicine, but not much in engineering. If you look
at the Science Center's position, it's more
oriented to be a university division than it may be
a TEAS division. But TEAS has always been the
parent administration. This study we're going
through now,
there have been proposals in these studies that
say to move us within the university, much like
today's processing center. Look at our funding.
These are the things that we're working on, Dr.
Irvin and the staff out here. That study's going on
right now. I don't know how much of it you can
publish or put together. possibly terminate
before you're through and you can say something
about it. Right now, I can say it's a study. And
there's several considerations. There's
several things that could affect you. Well, TEAS
is reevaluating a lot of its programs just to see if
it's serving the way it should be. That's right. In
this case, it may not be serving as it should.
We may not be serving the tease parent
organizations based on their philosophy.
Because of the expense of operating the facility,
they would prefer to operate where we either paid
our way or almost all of it. At least 90%, say.
85% to 90%. Based on that philosophy I gave you
earlier, once you develop a research capability,
solid sound research practices would be to
subsidize, or pay for the subsidy of that unit.
Well, data processing around that, getting out of
T's and becoming state subsidized. That may be the
way we go. Oh, I think so. Definitely, in the
proposals, there have been statements of
becoming a line item out of state budget. There are
many things. If the university system feels that
this facility should be operated on a subsidy
basis, and they want to have the state funded
directly, then that's a way to go. Is there
anything else you'd like to tell me about the
particular projects you remember here? Oh, well,
okay. Now, if you want to talk about the The fun
things, yeah. Sure, tell me the fun things. Well,
the fun thing, I would classify them as the animal
experiments. First, in the early days, I'd say
late 60s, when we had our first reactor type here, a
lower power than we have now, we were doing some
goatee radiations. That's Sidney Brown's stuff?
Yes, the goats. And we didn't have the... large
radiation cell that we have now. And we would
bundle that goat up in a tow sack, just a little
small bundle, his legs wrapped over his head and
all sorts of things. And then we would shove that
animal upward in through an opening toward the
reactor, close the door and then bring the reactor
up for exposure. And then they would bring the
animal out after Of course, we moved away with the
reactor and cleared the radiation. And then they
would take the animal over to the laboratory next
door here and had the animal go through an obstacle
course. And the poor thing, once he got out of the
tow sack, it would take him an hour just to get his
legs back, even if he were well. So I thought that
was quite interesting. Measurements were not
that accurate at the time. Those became quite
sophisticated compared to the goats. As we later
started our work with the Brooks Medical Center in
San Antonio, the irradiation of baboons and
monkeys, mainly monkeys, reesey monkeys. These
are done in our large radiation cell. Very
fascinating experiments because the animals are
highly trained and they perform very difficult
tasks. They must perform them very quickly. And
once they've been irradiated,
provided a lethal dose of radiation, then they are
monitored for their function, as well as the vital
organs of the body are checked and monitored. And
it's very interesting to watch those
experiments. Of course, the animal is not allowed
to suffer a radiation death. This is a laboratory
animal. Our lamb animals are usually put to sleep,
as they were in the case of the monkeys. And the
baboon is a similar thing. These were studies that
were being made to determine man's performance.
How would man be able to function after a lethal
dose of radiation, particularly a military
application. The fighter pilot that It's not
blown out of the sky, but he receives a lethal dose
from a nuclear warhead or something, or he flies
through a nuclear radiation field or something
and receives a lethal dose. What do you do? Do you
bring him back home, or do you let him perform his
mission? That's the information thereafter. The
other interesting part thereafter, though, They
were trying to determine if there was any chemical
treatments or injections into the vital organs
that could change their functions once they were
subjected to that much radiation. So there were a
lot of pre-radiation surgery experiments,
implants of capillary tubes and injection points
in the animals, particularly the brain. to see if
they could improve the brain functions
after an exposure like that.
I'd say of all the experiments we've done, those
are the most interesting, mainly because of the
animals, I guess, and what they could do. They're
very clever little fellows. It's unbelievable.
And each animal was valued at about $15,000 an
animal because of the training. Oh, yeah, they
could fly teeter sticks like an airplane. They had
a seat they were in, and the computer would tilt the
seat. If it tilted more than 30 degrees, then they
would get shocked. So when it started tilting,
they had a little stick just like an airplane. If
the seat was tilting farther, they'd pull back. If
the seat tilted to the left, they'd throw the stick
to the right. They'd do everything they could to
get that seat back level. So they wouldn't get
shot? Oh, yeah. Perfectly level. And they could do
it very quickly. And they had a very excellent
sense of color and pattern descriptions. Some of
the animals were trained to look at a series of
patterns, four patterns placed in front of them,
mainly squares of different colors. very
difficult to distinguish if you had a red, red,
white, yellow, or whether you had a red, yellow,
white, blue, you know, be that close, he'd have to
distinguish. And then he would give a single frame
down below and let him look at it for about seven
seconds. And then he would have to match, once that
went off, went outside, he would have to match that
same frame within another seven seconds by
touching the right picture. So he was
coordinating the colors as well as the patterns.
And to do it that rapidly, it's very difficult. And
is there any animal research going on right now?
No, we're not doing those now. Those experiments
have terminated. But funding went out on it. Oh, we
were doing those up until about six years ago. They
would come up two or three times a year. They have a
full team of physicians, veterinarians,
technicians, and they bring all their equipment.
All we can do again, once again, is provide them
with a reactor.
Well, the other thing that we think is exciting
about our reactor is the pulsing of the reactor. We
were exposing these animals by pulsing.
Our reactor can operate two ways. It can operate at
a steady power, or we can place it in the pulse mode
and put it on an excursion. It goes on a power
excursion, but it shuts itself down by a nuclear
technique because it doesn't last very long when
it goes on the power excursion. The order of
milliseconds, in other words. And we have no
capability of shutting it off that quickly unless
it shuts itself off. So this is all built into the
technology of the fuel. And that's why we changed
fuel back in 1969. We changed from the initial fuel
and went to a more sophisticated research reactor
fuel called Triga. T-R-I-G-A in San Diego.
They're the manufacturers of it and developers of
it. And we've been a Triga reactor ever since. And
then that's when you got the capability to pulse?
That's when we went into the capability of pulsing
and also we upgraded the power by a factor of 10. We
went from a 100 kilowatt reactor to a 1 megawatt
reactor, steady steady. And when you do that, your
capability of producing these isotopes jumps
tenfold automatically because there are 10 times
as many neutrons. So what we were doing before In 10
hours, we could now do in one hour, as far as total
time. That's what's nice about that. But there's
still a technical break.